#### [Dealing with Audio](#dealingwithaudio)

WorldWide Telescope can play back a separate stereo voice-over and music tracks to tell a narrative story and provide a music soundscape for a tour. Before starting to create audio you should decide which of two general strategies you want to follow. The first is to produce an entire audio file for the entire tour and the other is to create separate audio files that are tied to each slide. The advantage of creating a single audio file is that you can globally adjust the level for audio on all slides, and work on global timing. However, for narration you will have to acquire a long sequence in one go, or use an audio editor to cut out sections, replace flubs etc. Also, if audio is recorded as one long track and you change the timing of the visuals you have to re-record or re-edit the narration track.

For these reasons, the recommended way to do audio is to place the musical bed as a single soundtrack and to include narration audio on a per-slide basic. This how-to will show how to do this.

1.  Get at least a draft of your tour done visually. Word drive the visuals and visuals drive the audio. The visuals will provide an estimate of the tour length.
2.  Find an [audio file](/Download/TourAssets#music) that has the sound and length that fit your tour. More ambient music is more appropriate to loop and thus allows a shorter file to be used as a bed for a longer tour.
3.  Make a short first slide. I often make the tour and then duplicate the first slide and make the first of the duplicates a very short – 0.5 to 1.0 second – slide. Make this slide a Master and don’t have any – or a very small amount of – motion and don’t have any text or images. The reason we make a short Master is to separate audio that spans multiple slides from text and images that will be on only a slide or two. If you put these elements onto a Master slide they will persist until the next master slide.
4.  Add the audio to the slide buy clicking on Browse under Music in the upper right hand of the WWT window. Browse to the music file. You can enter a Fade In and Fade Out times for the music and setting it to automatically repeat or not. Adjust the slider to be 1/2 to 2/3 the way to maximum. Since this is a Master slide, the music will play over all slides until the tour hits a music track on another Master slide.
5.  You can add music tracks on a per-slide basis which will be mixed into the musical bed of the master slide. This might be useful if you wanted to coordinate a sound effect coordinated with a visual on one slide.
6.  Assuming you have a script, which may or may not be displayed as text on each slide, you know what words to say for each slide. Record a voiceover file (e.g., MP3) for each slide. It is worthwhile to label the slides with text and use the automatic slide numbering (check Guided Tours/Show Slide Numbers) for the slides and use a similar naming for the narration audio files. When recording try to use a quiet room without hard surfaces (i.e., carpet, drapes and objects in the room are good and fans air conditioners etc. are bad). It is useful to normalize the voiceovers in their uncompressed form before compressing to MP3\. Tips on getting great audio are in another how-to ([Editing Audio](#editingaudio)). You want to make sure that the slide is at least as long as the narration audio. Add the audio by clicking Browse for Voiceover which is just below the Music selector.
7.  You can preview the tour from that slide and adjust the level of the narration relative to the music. When in doubt it is more important to be able to hear the voiceover than the music.
